FINAL CAPSTONE - AUTOMATION PLAN

Cornerstone Relief International (CRI)


1. OPERATING MODEL

AIOps is used by CRI to detect, correlate, diagnose, recommend and
bounded remediation.

The Type of an action is specified prior to allowing execution by an agent.

The decision tests are:

1. Is the action reversible?
2. What is the blast radius?
3. Could it destroy or expose data?
4. Could it weaken a security boundary?
5. Could it create recurring financial cost?
6. How many systems, users, or offices could it affect?

Closed loop:

EVENT -> OBSERVE -> DIAGNOSE -> PROPOSE -> POLICY CHECK ->
HUMAN GATE WHEN REQUIRED -> ACT -> VERIFY UNDERLYING SIGNAL -> AUDIT


2. AUTONOMY LADDER

OBSERVE

Example:
read_observability

The agent can consume the OpenTelemetry metrics, logs, traces, Kubernetes status,
Model telemetry, and GPU telemetry. It is unable to write on external or modify something.
system state. The observation is not only recorded with actor identification but also a UTC
timestamp.

RECOMMEND

Examples:
propose_patch_priority
delete_persistent_volume
modify_firewall_rule

The agent might give the evidence and draft a change. A human performs or
schedules the action.

Persistent-volume deletion is still in RECOMMEND due to it being able to cause
irreversible data loss. Firewall changes are left at RECOMMEND as they change
Can be used to create a security trust boundary and open several systems.


APPROVE

Examples:
scale_deployment
rotate_credential
promote_model_to_production

The agent can create the precise action, however, an approved action by a named human.
Once the appropriate checks (see below) have been made.

Scaling is reversible, but it alters the capacity and recurrent expenditures. Credential
rotation is more secure and needs out of band identity verification.
to model promotion, one needs to change the behaviour of the models and that introduces risk in the handling of data (and in the model).
The process of evaluation, model/data documentation, AIBOM, privacy/security review, a rollback
Approval from the target, and human approval.

ACT

Examples:
restart_stateless_pod
rebuild_embedding_index

Only reversible work can be automatic action.

A stateless restart can only occur in one pod, is rate limited, and is independent.
verified.

Embedding index rebuild is a new derived index that is produced from a signed source.
corpus validates the new index, and only switches an alias once it is validated.
Does not delete protected sources documents.

3. REAL AUTONOMY VALIDATION

The final validation was executed and saved to:

output/autonomy-tier-check.txt

Actual result:

tiers: ['act', 'approve', 'observe', 'recommend']
AUTONOMY LADDER PASS


4. AUDIT AND VERIFICATION

All proposals, gate decisions, approvals, actions, verification results, model IDs etc.
UTC timestamp is added to a WORM audit target.

The agents are not allowed to modify the audit history.

VERIFY is not just about verifying if a service signal exists; it's also about verifying the original service signal.
The command exited with codes: 0. The Service can still be unsuccessful
unhealthy, replace the incorrect resource, introduce a security issue, or make
an unplanned cost.


5. RULE OF TWO

An agent may never be an unsupervised agent at the same time as he or she has:

1. untrusted content;
2. sensitive or private-data access;
3. an unrestricted external or mutating tool.

The private data is unavoidably read by the restricted case-note RAG and the case-note RAG may retrieve.
untrusted text. It is, therefore, without an arbitrary communication path towards the outside.

Named human gate is traversed by the sensitive exports and by mutating actions.


6. OWNERSHIP

Policy owner:
Maya Chen - Director of IT

Infrastructure approvals:
Daniel Okoro - Infrastructure and Cloud Lead

Security and credential approvals:
Sofia Alvarez - Security and Identity Lead

Model-promotion technical owner:
Leah Mensah - ML Platform Engineer

Beneficiary privacy and data gate:
Grace Kim - Data Protection and Beneficiary Systems Lead

AIOps operations owner:
Samuel Reed - SRE and Automation Lead


7. ACCOUNTABILITY

The named human approver continues to be responsible for the approval.

The AI agent doesn't actually take any action; he or she only collects evidence and comes up with an action plan.
risk-acceptance authority.
